MESSIEURS LES PRESIDENTS, MESDAMES, MESDEMOISELLES, MESSIEURS, TODAY MARKS A NEW ERA IN FRENCH POLITICS.
THIS IS NOT ONLY DUE, MONSIEUR PRESIDENT DU CONSEIL_CONSTITUTIONNEL, TO THE PROCLAMATION OF THE RESULT THAT YOU HAVE JUST RECALLED AND FOR WHICH, OUT OF RESPECT FOR FRANCE AND ITS LONG HISTORY, I CAN MEASURE THE HONOR.
THIS IS NOT ONLY DUE TO THE 13396203 MEN AND WOMEN WHO PLACED THEIR TRUST IN ME BY NOMINATING ME TO BECOME THE TWENTIETH PRESIDENT OF THE FRENCH REPUBLIC.
IN REALITY, IT'S DUE TO ALL THE VOTES CAST ON MAY 19, 1974.
THESE VOTES, EQUAL ACCORDING TO THE RULES OF DEMOCRACY, FROM MEN AND WOMEN, THE YOUNG AND THE NOT-SO-YOUNG, THE WORKING AND THE NON-WORKING, EACH OF WHOM VOTED IN THEIR OWN WAY AND ACCORDING TO THEIR OWN PREFERENCES, ALL SHOWING THEIR DESIRE FOR CHANGE.
MY FIRST GREETING FROM THE NEW PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC GOES TO THOSE WHO ASPIRED TO BECOME PRESIDENT IN THIS COMPETITION AND WHO HAD THE ABILITY TO DO SO, IN PARTICULAR MR.
FRANCOIS MITTERRAND AND MR JACQUES CHABAN-DELMAS.
SO I'LL BE THE ONE TO LEAD THE CHANGE, BUT I WON'T BE LEADING IT ALONE.
IF I INTEND TO FULLY ASSUME THE ROLE OF PRESIDENT, AND IF I ACCEPT THE RESPONSIBILITIES THAT SUCH AN ATTITUDE IMPLIES, THE ACTION TO BE TAKEN WILL INVOLVE THE GOVERNMENT IN ITS INITIATIVES AND PARLIAMENT IN ITS CONTROL AND RIGHTS.
I'M NOT GOING IT ALONE, BECAUSE I'M STILL LISTENING TO THE IMMENSE RUMOR OF THE FRENCH PEOPLE, WHO HAVE ASKED US FOR CHANGE.
WE WILL MAKE THIS CHANGE WITH THEM, FOR THEM, AS THEY ARE IN THEIR NUMBERS AND IN THEIR DIVERSITY, AND WE WILL LEAD IT IN PARTICULAR WITH THEIR YOUTH, WHO CARRY LIKE TORCHES THE JOY AND THE FUTURE.
MR. PRESIDENTS, LADIES AND GENTLEMEN, THE BOOK OF TIME OPENS WITH ITS DIZZYING BLANK PAGES.
TOGETHER AS ONE GREAT PEOPLE, UNITED AND FRATERNAL, LET US EMBARK ON THE NEW ERA OF FRENCH POLITICS.
Mister President,
ladies and gentlemen
On this day when I am invested with the highest office of state, I send a message of confidence to the French.
We are a great country which, in its history, has always been able to face the trials and meet the challenges that have presented itself to it.
Each time, he succeeded, remaining himself.
Always in elevation and openness.
Never, in lowering and withdrawing.
This is the mandate that I received from the French people on May 6: to restore justice to France.
Opening a new path in Europe.
Contribute to world peace and the preservation of the planet.
I measure the weight of the constraints we face: massive debt, weak growth, high unemployment, degraded competitiveness and a Europe that is struggling to emerge from the crisis.
But I affirm it here: there is no inevitability, as long as a common will drives us, a clear direction is set and we fully mobilize our strengths and assets.
They are considerable: the productivity of our workforce, the excellence of our researchers, the dynamism of our entrepreneurs, the work of our farmers, the quality of our public services, the influence of our culture and our language without forgetting the vitality of our demographics and the impatience of our youth.
The first condition for regained confidence is the unity of the Nation.
Our differences must not become divisions.
Our diversities of discord.
The country needs appeasement, reconciliation, unity.
It is the role of the President of the Republic to contribute to this.
Making all French people live together without distinction, around the same values, those of the Republic.
This is my imperative duty.
Whatever our age, whatever our convictions, wherever we live - in France or overseas - in our cities as well as in our neighborhoods and our rural territories, we are France.
A France not pitted against another, but a France united in the same community of destiny.
And I will reaffirm in all circumstances our intangible principles of secularism, as I will fight against racism, anti-Semitism and all discrimination.
Confidence also means setting an example.
President of the Republic, I will fully assume the exceptional responsibilities of this high mission.
I will set priorities but I will not decide everything or for everyone.
In accordance with the Constitution, the government will determine and conduct the policy of the Nation.
Parliament will be respected in its rights.
Justice will have all the guarantees of its independence.
State power will be exercised with dignity but simplicity.
With great ambition for the country.
And a scrupulous sobriety in behavior.
The State will be impartial because it is the property of all French people and therefore does not belong to those who have received responsibility for it.
The rules for appointing public officials will be regulated.
And loyalty, competence, and a sense of the general interest will be the only criteria to determine my choices for the highest servants of the State.
France is fortunate to have a quality civil service.
I want to express my gratitude to her and the expectations that I place in her and in each of her agents.
Trust is in democracy itself.
I believe in local democracy and I intend to revive it through a new act of decentralization likely to give new freedoms for the development of our territories.
I believe in social democracy, and new spaces for negotiation will be open to the social partners, whom I will respect, both employee representatives and professional organizations.
I believe in citizen democracy, that of associations and civic commitments which will be supported for the millions of volunteers who dedicate themselves to it.
Trust is based on justice in choices.
Justice in the very conception of wealth creation.
It is time to put production before speculation, investment in the future before satisfaction in the present, sustainable employment before immediate profit.
It is time to initiate the energy and ecological transition.
It is time to open a new frontier for technological development and innovation.
But there is also justice in the distribution of the essential effort.
There cannot be sacrifices for some, ever more numerous, and privileges for others, ever fewer.
This will be the meaning of the reforms that the government will carry out with the aim of rewarding merit, work, initiative, and discouraging rents and exorbitant remuneration.
Justice will be the criterion on which every public decision will be made.
Finally, the Republic must place trust in young people.
I will give him back the place that should be his, first.
This is the foundation of my commitment to the school of the Republic because its mission is vital for the cohesion of our country, the success of our economy. It is the desire that drives me to renovate professional training, supporting young people towards employment and fighting against precariousness.
It’s also the great idea of civic service that I intend to relaunch.
Ladies and gentlemen,
On this day, many peoples, and first of all in Europe, are waiting for us and watching us.
To overcome the crisis that is hitting it, Europe needs projects.
She needs solidarity.
She needs growth.
To our partners, I will propose a new pact which combines the necessary reduction of public debts with the essential stimulation of the economy.
And I will tell them the need for our continent to protect, in such an unstable world, not only its values but its interests, in the name of the principle of reciprocity in trade.
France is a nation engaged in the world.
By its history, by its culture, by its values of humanism, universality, freedom, it occupies a unique place.
The Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen has gone around the world.
We must be its custodians and place ourselves alongside all the democratic forces in the world who adhere to its principles.
France will respect all people; it will be, everywhere, faithful to its vocation which is to defend the freedom of peoples, the honor of the oppressed, the dignity of women.
At this moment when I am responsible for presiding over the destiny of our country and representing it in the world, I salute my predecessors, all those who before me had the responsibility of leading the Republic, Charles de Gaulle who put his prestige at the service of the greatness and sovereignty of France, Georges Pompidou who made the industrial imperative a national issue, Valéry Giscard d'Estaing who relaunched the modernization of society, François Mitterrand who advanced freedoms and social progress, Jacques Chirac who demonstrated his attachment to the values of the Republic; Nicolas Sarkozy to whom I send my best wishes for the new life that is opening up before him.
Long live the Republic.
Long live France.
"Ladies and gentlemen,
The French chose, as you recalled, on May 7, hope and the spirit of conquest.
The whole world watched our presidential election.
Everywhere, we wondered if the French would decide in their turn to fall back on the illusory past, if they would break with the march of the world, leave the scene of History, give in to democratic defiance, the spirit of division and turn their backs on the Enlightenment, or if, on the contrary, they were going to embrace the future, collectively give themselves new impetus, reaffirm their faith in the values that have made them a great people.
On May 7, the French made their choice.
May they be thanked.
The responsibility they have entrusted to me is an honor, the gravity of which I appreciate.
Today, more than ever, the world and Europe need France.
They need a France that is strong and sure of its destiny.
They need a France that raises the voice of freedom and solidarity.
They need a France that knows how to invent the future.
The world needs what the French have always taught it: the audacity of freedom, the demand for equality, the desire for fraternity.
However, for decades, France has doubted itself.
She feels threatened in her culture, in her social model, in her deep beliefs.
She doubts what made her.
This is why my mandate will be guided by two requirements.
The first will be to restore to the French this confidence in themselves, which has been weakened for too long.
I assure you, I did not think for a single second that it would magically recover on the evening of May 7th.
It will be slow, demanding, but essential work.
It will be up to me to convince the French that our country, which today seems to be undermined by the sometimes contrary winds of the course of the world, has within it all the resources to be at the forefront of nations.
I will convince our compatriots that the power of France is not declining, but that we are on the verge of an extraordinary renaissance, because we hold in our hands all the assets which will make and which make the great powers of the 21st century. ? century.
For this, I will not give in on any of the commitments made to the French.
Everything that contributes to the strength of France and its prosperity will be implemented: work will be freed, businesses will be supported, initiative will be encouraged.
Culture and education, through which emancipation, creation and innovation are built, will be at the heart of my action.
French people who feel forgotten by this vast movement in the world must see themselves better protected.
Everything that forges our national solidarity will be rebuilt, reinvented, strengthened.
Equality in the face of life's accidents will be strengthened.
Everything that makes France a safe country, where we can live without fear, will be amplified.
Republican secularism will be defended, our law enforcement, our intelligence, our armies, comforted.
The Europe, which we need, will be refounded, relaunched, because it protects us and allows us to carry our values into the world.
Our institutions, criticized by some, must regain in the eyes of the French the effectiveness which guaranteed their sustainability.
Because I believe in the institutions of the V? Republic and will do everything in my power to ensure that they function according to the spirit that gave birth to them.
To do this, I will ensure that our country experiences renewed democratic vitality.
Citizens will have a voice.
They will be listened to.
In this fight, I will need everyone.
The responsibility of all the elites - political, economic, social, religious - of all the bodies of the French Nation will be called upon.
We can no longer take refuge behind uses or habits that are sometimes timeless.
We must rediscover the deep meaning, the dignity of what brings us together today: acting justly and effectively for our people.
France is only strong if it is prosperous.
France is only a model for the world if it is exemplary.
And this is my second requirement.
Because we will have given the French a taste for the future and pride in who they are, the whole world will listen to France's words.
Because we will have been able to overcome our fears and anxieties together, we will together give the example of a people knowing how to assert its values and its principles, which are those of democracy and the Republic.
The efforts of my predecessors in this direction were remarkable and I would like to salute them here.
I think of General de Gaulle, who worked to restore France and restore its rank in the concert of nations.
I think of Georges Pompidou, who made our country a major industrial power.
To Valéry Giscard d'Estaing, who knew how to bring France and its society into modernity.
To François Mitterrand, who supports the reconciliation of the French dream and the European dream.
To Jacques Chirac, giving us the rank of a nation knowing how to say no to the pretensions of the warmongers.
To Nicolas Sarkozy, not counting his energy to resolve the financial crisis which had hit the world so violently.
And I am of course thinking of François Hollande, pioneering the Paris Climate Agreement and protecting the French in a world hit by terrorism.
Their work, especially in recent decades, has too often been hindered in a deleterious domestic climate, by the discouragement of French men and women who consider themselves unjustly disadvantaged, downgraded, or forgotten.
What France had to say to the world was sometimes weakened by a national situation crippled by worry and even distrust.
Today, ladies and gentlemen, the time has come for France to rise to the occasion.
The division and fractures that run through our society must be overcome, whether economic, social, political or moral; because the world expects us to be strong, solid and far-sighted.
France's mission in the world is eminent.
We will take all our responsibilities to provide, whenever necessary, a relevant response to the major contemporary crises.
Whether it is the migration crisis, the climate challenge, authoritarian excesses, the excesses of global capitalism, and of course terrorism; From now on, nothing hits some while sparing others.
We are all interdependent.
We are all neighbors.
France will always ensure that it stands alongside freedom and human rights, but always to build lasting peace.
We have an immense role: to correct the excesses of the course of the world, and to ensure the defense of freedom.
This is our vocation.
To do this, we will need a more efficient, more democratic, more political Europe, because it is the instrument of our power and our sovereignty.
I will work on it.
Geography has shrunk considerably.
But time has sped up.
We are living in a period that will decide the destiny of France for the decades to come.
We will not only fight for this generation, but for generations to come.
It is up to us, all of us, here and now, to decide the world in which these generations will live.
This is perhaps our greatest responsibility.
We have to build the world that our youth deserve.
I know that the French, at this time, expect a lot from me.
They are right because the mandate they entrust to me gives them the right to make absolute demands on me.
I am fully aware of this.
Nothing will be taken the easy way or compromise.
Nothing will weaken my resolve.
Nothing will make me renounce defending the superior interests of France at all times and in all places.
At the same time, I will have the constant desire to reconcile and bring together all French people.
The trust that the French men and women have shown in me fills me with immense energy.
The intimate certainty that together we can write one of the most beautiful pages of our History will drive my action.
In these moments when everything can change, the French people have always been able to find the energy, the discernment, the spirit of harmony to build profound change.
We are there.
It is for this mission that I will humbly serve our people.
I know I can count on all our compatriots to carry out the considerable and exciting task that awaits us.
As far as I'm concerned, starting this evening, I'll be at work.
Mr. Mayor,
- ladies,
- ladies,
- gentlemen,
- Mayor Jacques Chirac, I thank you for the wishes you have just expressed for the success of this new period which has just begun in the history of the Republic, as well as the wishes you express for the change which France has just affirmed its will.
- It is very true that I come here in accordance with a tradition, but even more than tradition, history makes it a duty to me.
In Paris, the first French Republic was born one day in the summer of 1792. It offered us, a step in advance, universal suffrage and with it these new words which were to go around the world, the rights of man and citizen.
- Difficult and painful childhood, so often fought, sometimes even defeated, but each time reborn with popular uprising.
Yes, it is in Paris that we can best talk about the Republic and freedom.
And it is at Paris City Hall that we can best talk about the Republic and equality.
- First counter-power, facing the lord's castle, the town hall asserts itself as the common house, the old face-to-face of the king and the provost, of the court and the city and later in counter-power way of Versailles and the Commune.
- 1830, 1848, 1870, 1871, what's the point of listing the dates, many have become celebrations, but let's not forget that they were first battles.
- Absolutism does not forgive municipal power.
To this one, less than to any other.
It is no coincidence that Napoleon Bonaparte abolished the municipal council of Paris for the benefit of the prefects, it is no coincidence that Louis-Napoléon in turn increased state supervision over the city.
- Victor Hugo said: “Whoever speaks to Paris, speaks to the whole world”.
- Today, through you, I prefer to address all the communes of France.
I have been mayor, I am still a municipal councilor, I know that here beats the heart of Paris, that it is finally here that we can talk and that I must talk about the Republic and fraternity.
A great memory haunts me at this moment, it was August 25, 1944.
For a few days Paris had taken up arms, the Parisian liberation committee and the Council of the Resistance had made this town hall, after the police headquarters, the symbol, the figurehead of liberated France, liberated by it- even.
August 25, August 26, I lived these days, 37 years ago, I was there, among others, to receive General de Gaulle, like him and like so many others, I listened to the profound noise of the crowd which rose towards the windows, like him and like so many others, I felt, as he wrote in his "War Memories", the sacred emotion which embraces us all, men and women, in these minutes which exceed each of our poor lives.
At that moment, France was fraternal.
You said it, Mayor Jacques Chirac, there is a lot to do.
But nothing will be done without fraternity and nothing without justice.
- At this moment when it is possible to abandon even for a moment the harshness of political competitions, who better than the President of the Republic measures the effort to be made? Who better than him can express the deep desire for union of our people? Everyone will of course remain faithful to their choices and their preferences and I do not intend to deviate myself from the commitments that I have subscribed to in the face of universal suffrage to respond to the aspiration for change of the French men and women who have supported me. trusts.
- The debate, the expression of differences are legitimate, are even necessary in a democracy, but beyond the confrontations I appeal to the cohesion of our country, source of vitality, guarantee of our power, to face the problems of time.
- Yes, Mr. Mayor, there is a lot to do.
Paris, city of lights, is also that of imagination because it is a city of memory.
Let us now know how to invent the future.
Long live Paris!
- Long live the Republic !
Mr President of the Constitutional Council,
- ladies,
- gentlemen,
- On the threshold of this seven-year term, I wish to interpret in a few words, as accurately as possible, the popular will expressed on May 8.
I will look towards the future, without recounting the accounts of the past, and I will ask this question: What essential lesson can I draw from the event which merits me taking responsibility today, in the continuity of our institutions and my own mandate, the supreme magistracy? The answer is there, obvious: through the heart and through reason, France aspires to bring together its forces while respecting its values, the values of the Republic.
And when I say France, I think of the vast majority of French people.
- It is on this theme that I committed myself to the country.
Our people have ratified it.
Beyond the vicissitudes of the moment, the hesitations, the delays, the normal after-effects of our competitions or the slowness of History trapped in its habits, I intend to persevere.
Moving towards unity and understanding contradictions, I will apply this paraphrase of a famous expression by Jaurès to my every day action, assured that, for the main thing, love of the homeland and attachment to democracy will take step on the quarrel.
- Let's repeat it without getting tired.
This month of May 1988 did not see the good prevail over the bad - nor the opposite -.
I don't like this summary dialectic.
Even if I deeply believe in the correctness of the principles in the name of which nearly seventeen million French people have placed their trust in me, even if I remain ardently attached to the ideal that freedom-loving socialists have served since the dawn of the industrial companies.
- Respect for each other is the basis of the pact without which the national community would lose its true meaning.
But an unjust France is a divided France.
A France closed in on itself and on its divisions is or would be incapable of winning the challenges that await it in the world arena, even more so in the borderless Europe of tomorrow.
This is why I do not separate the political duty of openness from the social obligation of solidarity, nor the obligation of solidarity from the spirit of enterprise, the spirit of initiative of which we have more than ever need.
- Democratize society, refuse exclusion, seek equal opportunities, educate youth, train them in professions and techniques that will bring them job security in companies that are themselves modernized, increase knowledge, serve the creation of the mind and the hands, healing the daily life of the greatest number of French people from its multiple defects, and sometimes from its intolerable servitudes, priority to dialogue here and there on the other side of the planet, that's it the path that must be taken, the meeting to which I invite you if we want the “hope principle” to triumph over the impulses of fear and confrontation.
- In short, it is the victory of the Republic that we must ensure together.
The Republic does not belong to anyone.
We are all, in different capacities, its guarantors and artisans.
On the construction site of these ever-new values, for these everyday battles called freedom, equality, fraternity, no volunteer is too many.
Next year we will celebrate its second centenary.
May our country retain its youth, momentum and influence!
- My dear compatriots, it is my responsibility above all others, in the name of the entire Nation, to ensure that the general interest prevails over particular or partisan interests.
Count on me.
I will not exaggerate France's role if I recall that what it does and the way in which it acts interests the whole world.
We know his message of peace, justice, progress.
I address it again to all the peoples of the earth.
Long live the Republic, Long live France.
Ladies and gentlemen,
On this day when I officially take office as President of the French Republic, I think of France, this old country which has gone through so many trials and which has always recovered, which has always spoken for all men and which I now have the heavy task of representing it in the eyes of the world.
I think of all the Presidents of the Fifth Republic who preceded me.
I think of General De Gaulle who twice saved the Republic, who restored France's sovereignty and the State's dignity and authority.
I think of Georges Pompidou and Valéry Giscard d'Estaing who, each in their own way, did so much to ensure that France entered modernity fully.
I think of François Mitterrand, who knew how to preserve institutions and embody political alternation at a time when it became necessary for the Republic to belong to all French people.
I think of Jacques Chirac, who for twelve years worked for peace and spread France's universal values throughout the world.
I think of the role he played in making all men aware of the imminence of ecological disaster and the responsibility of each of them towards future generations.
But in this solemn moment, my thoughts go first to the French people who are a great people, who have a great history and who stood up to express their faith in democracy, to say that they no longer wanted to suffer .
I think of the French people who have always known how to overcome challenges with courage and find within themselves the strength to transform the world.
I think with emotion of this expectation, this hope, this need to believe in a better future which were expressed so strongly during the campaign which has just ended.
I think with seriousness of the mandate that the French people have entrusted to me and of this strong demand that they carry within themselves and which I have no right to disappoint.
Demand to bring the French together because France is only strong when it is united and today it needs to be strong to meet the challenges it faces.
Demand to respect the word given and to keep commitments because trust has never been so shaken, so fragile.
Moral requirement because never has the crisis of values been so deep, because never has the need to find reference points been so strong.
Demand to rehabilitate the values of work, effort, merit, respect, because these values are the foundation of the dignity of the human person and the condition of social progress.
Demand for tolerance and openness because never have intolerance and sectarianism been so destructive, because never has it been so necessary for all women and men of good will to pool their talents, their intelligence, their ideas to imagine the future.
Demand for change because never has inaction been so dangerous for France as in this rapidly changing world where everyone strives to change faster than others, where any delay can be fatal and quickly becomes irrecoverable.
Demand for security and protection because it has never been so necessary to fight against fear of the future and against this feeling of vulnerability which discourages initiative and risk-taking.
Demand for order and authority because we have given in too much to disorder and violence, which are primarily harmful to the most vulnerable and the most humble.
Demand for results because the French are fed up with the fact that in their daily lives nothing ever improves, because the French are fed up with their lives being always heavier, always harder, because the French are fed up with sacrifices imposed on them without any results.
Demand for justice because for a long time so many French people have not felt such a strong feeling of injustice, nor the feeling that sacrifices were not fairly distributed, nor that rights were not equal for all.
Demand to break with past behaviors, habits of thought and intellectual conformism because never have the problems to be solved been so unprecedented.
The people gave me a mandate.
I will fill it.
I will fill it out scrupulously, with the desire to be worthy of the trust shown in me by the French.
I will defend the independence and identity of France.
I will ensure respect for the authority of the State and its impartiality.
I will strive to build a Republic based on real rights and an irreproachable democracy.
I will fight for a Europe that protects, for the union of the Mediterranean and for the development of Africa.
I will make the defense of human rights and the fight against global warming the priorities of France's diplomatic action in the world.
The task will be difficult and it will have to take time.
Each of you in your place in the State and each citizen in your place in society have a vocation to contribute to this.
I want to express my conviction that in the service of France there is no side.
There is only the good will of those who love their country.
There are only the skills, ideas and convictions of those who are driven by a passion for the general interest.
To all those who want to serve their country, I say that I am ready to work with them and that I will not ask them to deny their convictions, betray their friendships and forget their history.
It is up to them to decide, in their soul and conscience as free men, how they want to serve France.
On May 6 there was only one victory, that of France which does not want to die, which wants order but which also wants movement, which wants progress but which wants fraternity, which wants efficiency but who wants justice, who wants identity but who wants openness.
On May 6 there was only one winner, the French people who do not want to give up, who do not want to let themselves be locked into immobility and conservatism, who no longer want us to decide to his place, that we think in his place.
Well, to this France which wants to continue living, to this people who do not want to give up, who deserve our love and our respect, I want to say my determination not to disappoint them.
Long live the Republic ! Long live France !